It's time now to discuss a very important aspect in WordPress theme creation.
And the reason for its importance is that it concerns security. And that is validation, sanitization and
escaping.
So imagine this is the post creation page in the wp-admin.
So we have our post title and the post content. And also imagine we have a custom field that is called
price. And don't worry we will talk about custom fields later in the course.
But briefly custom fields are just extra fields that we add to our posts in order to add more information
in our post.
So whenever we click Save, our data will go into the database.
Now imagine this is the frontend of our website which our theme is responsible for.
And we now want to display the data that we just saved.
So we request the data from the database. And we just display the data somewhere in the theme,
right?
So sounds easy.
But what if now the user enters something that is not a number. The value will be saved to the database
and that's also will be displayed in the frontend.
So we want to avoid this from happening.
And that's where we can use is validation. So validation is the process of comparing the data against the set
of rules or patterns. And then decide whether to pass the data or just discard it.
So in our case we want to make sure that the price is an integer. So we can parse the user input to a
function called intval(). intval() will try to convert whatever the user typed into an integer and if it
couldn't it will just return 0.
So we can check if the return of this function is 0 then  we will discard the value.
Otherwise we will pass it.
So in our case what we typed will be converted to 230 and this is what will be saved in the database. If
intval() however returns 0 we will discard the operation completely.
You won't even touch the database, because our  data is invalid.
So validation should be the very first thing to check before using the data.
This way you will know whether you have valid data to work with or you just have to discard it.
So this is the definition of validation according to WordPress. And validation is very strict.
You have to decide whether your data is valid or not.
There is no middle ground.
And in order to perform validation you can use built in PHP functions like isset, empty, string length,
preg_match, count, in_array and so on.
And we'll  have some examples throughout this course.
You can also use some of WordPress's functions like is_email() to check if the value is a valid email or not.
And other custom WordPress functions. I'll put a link to  these functions so you can read more about them.
You can also create your own custom functions like maybe you need to check if a value is a valid U.S.
phone number or a zip number and so on.
Imagine now another situation where you maybe need to give your users some liberty to write whatever
they want.
So in our example let's say you need to give the user the ability to type the price as a string and
not as a number. In order to type the currency symbol and not just the value.
In this case it will be hard to validate the user's input and that's because there are no clear rules
on what's valid and what's invalid.
So in this case you can skip validation and whatever the user typed it will just appear in the
frontend.
So that's very simple and we didn't have to do anything actually.
But that's very unsafe. If you for instance have someone who does data entry for you. And this person
maybe is not very trustworthy.
He can maybe enter some malicious code here in the price field,
right?
This code will be then saved to the database.
And when you display it on your frontend the script will actually run.
And this is very dangerous.
So how can we give our users a bit of liberty but at the same time make sure that no code will be saved
into the database?
And the answer is sanitization. Sanitization is the process of cleaning your input data from anything
that you would not like to save it to the database, like code for example.  WordPress provides us with some
great sanitization functions like sanitize_text_field() for example which is used when you are expecting
your data to be just text. Sanitization functions should be the last thing you do before saving it to your
database.
That's why in the diagram I put it a bit close to the database.
So clean your data and save. So sanitize_text_field() in our case will remove the SCRIPT tag and the value
will be saved as 230 and thus when we display our data,
no scripts will run.
So as you can see unlike validation, sanitization can actually modify the data. In validation however you
can either use the data or just discard it completely.
So this is the definition of validation according to WordPress.
So it's the process of cleaning or filtering your input data. So you can use it when you don't know
what to expect or you don't want to be very strict with data validation.
WordPress also provides a lot of great functions for sanitization. I'll put a link to them so you can read
more about them.
Now let's see if we have the same situation where we would like to give the user the liberty to type
anything. And let us assume that we've done something wrong in our validation or maybe forgot to sanitize
or maybe we've done our validation and sanitization but some malicious user managed to inject some
code in our database somehow.
So now we have some code sitting in our database. And when we display this data in the frontend this code will
run, right?
And this is where we will have to use escaping.
Escaping is the process of securing the output by stripping some unwanted data like some HTML tags or
SCRIPT tags.
WordPress also provides some great escaping functions. But in our case we should use esc_html() since
you are rendering HTML into the screen.
So what the escaping will do is that instead of rendering the SCRIPT tag as code it will render it as
text.
So this way it would be harmless and nothing inside it will actually run.
And this way we have prevented scripts from running
even though it's saved in the database. So escaping is the most important part in this process because
that's when we render data to our users.
And it should be done the very last thing before outputting the data.
And this is referred to as late escape.
So here is the WordPress definition of escaping.
And here are some of the escaping functions.
esc_html() for example will be used if you are rendering something inside HTML tags. Like maybe rendering
a title inside of H1 tags.
We also have esc_url() when you're outputting a URL like for example in a "src" attribute or
an "href". esc_js()  for when you are rendering in line javascript.
We also have esc_attr() for when you are outputting something in an HTML attribute like
maybe a "class" or a "title" and so on.
And finally esc_textarea().
When you're outputting something inside of a textarea. In some cases you can also use sanitization functions
instead of escaping functions
When you are rendering something in your theme.
So let's take a quick look on the difference between sanitization and escaping.
So suppose we have this text in our database. And now we want to output it in our theme. So escaping will
render the HTML tags as text instead of rendering it as code, right? Sanitization
however will not render the HTML tags at all.
So depending on your situation you can either use escaping or sanitization functions when you render
something in your theme.
So I hope this is clear and if not don't worry we will use these functions a lot throughout this course.
And I think by the time things will become more clear.
In fact let's see in the code that we've written so far if we can use any of these functions.
So let's open index.php.
And let's check all the functions that get something from the database and see if we have to sanitize
or escape any data.
So here we have the_permalink(), we have the_title_attributes(), we have the_title() and we have the_excerpt().
And also we've the two custom functions that we've written.
So let's start with the_permalink(). So WordPress functions can sometimes need escaping and sometimes WordPress
will just handle it.
So in order to know let's Google the function.
And let's click on this link. And then let's scroll down and see the discussion below.
And as you can see in this example it's used directly without any escaping.
And the reason is if we took a look at the source code for the function WordPress already echoes and escapes
the result of get_permalink(), right?
So when we use the_permalink() we don't have to escape because it's already escaped.
If we use get_permanent() however we will have to escape. And we'll see that in the helper functions that
we've written. We used get_permalink() in them.
So in this case we will have to escape. But when we use the_permalink() there is no need to escape.
So let's go back. We have the_title_attributes() and the purpose of this function is to actually clean
the title you know that will be used in the "title" attribute.
So it's definitely safe to use this function without any escaping.
the_title() is kind of debatable. By default WordPress does not escape the_title(), but they do that deliberately.
And that's because some users like admins can actually type HTML in the title. So you can just escape
the_title().
This way you will be removing a feature that WordPress deliberately allows. So to keep the title safe
just don't give any admin access to someone who's not trusted. Other user types like authors or contributors
will not be allowed to type HTML in the title.
And finally the_excerpt().
It's also safe.
WordPress will also handle it.
So let's see the helper functions that we've written. And here we have get_permalink().
And as we mentioned if we use get_permalink() and not the_permalink() we will have to escape it. And it's a URL so esc_url()
and then get_permalink(). And then we have get_the_date().
And this is probably safe but just in case we can also escape it.
So this is an HTML attribute so we can use esc_attr(), right?
And then we have get_the_date() again
But inside HTML tags so esc_html().
Next we have the author URL so we can use
esc_url() around the whole URL. And we've the author user name so we can use esc_html() for this one.
get_the_permalink() is actually the same as get_permalink().
It's just an alias. And it also needs escaping so let's esc_url().
And then the_title_attribute() and get_the_title().
We already mentioned that these are safe.
So that's it for escaping and sanitization and validation.
We haven't yet done any validation or sanitization. But when we get into the admin stuff, the wp-admin we will
do a lot of them.
So see you in the next lecture.